---
tags:
- Systems
- Networking
---

# ECE428

ECE 428/CS 425 (Distributed Systems) is a 3/4-credit-hour course that satisfies the Technical Elective requirements for ECE majors and satisfies the Advanced Computing Elective requirements for CEs. It is offered every semester.

## Content Covered

ECE 428 is an overview of distributed algorithms and distributed systems concepts. The class starts off with a discussion of different system models which will be used throughout the semester - namely, synchronous and asynchronous networks. After this, the class covers failure detection, timing and ordering issues (in the context of multicast), and continues to discuss the impossibility of consensus in an asynchronous system if even 1 process might crash. From here, many different topics are covered, such as distributed hash tables, distributed mutual exclusion algorithms, leader election, concurrency control (transactions), byzantine fault tolerance, replication, distributed shared memory, and various approaches to consistency, partition resilience, and availability, to name several; some major themes throughout the course are Fault Tolerance and scaleability (peer-to-peer designs). If time remains, other topics may be covered.

## Prerequisites

- [ECE391](ECE391.md)

This is an official prerequisite that is particularly relevant for the networking portions.

## When to Take It

This class requires strong programming skills and a good understanding of asynchrony in programs; exceptional students may find it possible to take it at the same time as [ECE391](ECE391.md) or CS341. This class is offered every semester.

## Course Structure

The lectures tend to move pretty fast and cover a lot of material. The class has two midterms and a final. The class also has several homeworks and 2 or 3 MPs. The homeworks are not given very often, and often will necessitate a bit of review, but otherwise are fairly simple. The MPs are only required for students who choose to select the four credit hr version. This is highly recommended because this is where a good portion of the learning (and work) for the class comes in. MPs are done in groups of 2, so finding a good partner is a great asset. The MPs usually take about a month, and are on topics such as reliable, causally-ordered multicast and distributed hash tables. The MPs require socket programming and some understanding of the basic OS utilities such as how processes work and how to use system calls. The overall workload for the class varies based on whether there is currently an MP - the workload is pretty light when there is no MP going on, but MPs take a serious amount of time.  Unlike earlier classes such as [CS225](../CS%20Course%20Offerings/CS225.md) and [ECE220](ECE220.md), MPs often require careful planning and cannot be implemented in a few nights.

The professors all borrow MPs from one another so the same set of MPs may be reused. Rather than having separate MPs and tight specifications, the MPs built on each other to create a distributed processing framework similar to Hadoop. Any languages are allowed, so if you and a partner can agree on a high-level language you can avoid dealing with very low-level details. However, falling behind early on would make later MPs more difficult; while code was released for an MP when it was over, it's much easier to understand your own system than someone else's. This organization makes the MPs more challenging but also very rewarding, and gives a good sense of the challenges associated with working in distributed systems.

## Instructors

The course is taught by Professor Indranil Gupta in the fall and Professor Radhika Mittal in the spring.

## Life After

Students who enjoy this class may want to consider [ECE438](ECE438.md) (Communication Networks) and CS538, although this is the equivalent of learning lower level details; regardless, a lot of innovations in the field have come from cross-layering topics from this class with the rest of the internet stack. Students might also consider 525 for more distributed systems. CS423 and 523 (Operating Systems) go into a lot of virtualization, platforms, cloud computing, and distributed file system content near the end. if transactions, synchronization, CAP theorem, and general database topics interest you look into [CS411](../CS%20Course%20Offerings/CS411.md), Databases, half of which goes into Database systems topics (the other half is how to use databases, with simplistic topics like queries and all that). This course prepares students to design distributed systems such as peer-to-peer networks or cloud-style services, so this class is great preparation for working on internet or cloud applications. Finally, there are several interesting CS 498s (e.g. Cloud Networking) and 598s (e.g. Internet Networking, High Performance Networks) dealing with these topics too that can be interesting.