---
tags:
- Signal processing
- Acoustics
---
# ECE402

ECE402 (Electronic Music Synthesis) is a 3-credit-hour course that satifies the Technical Electives requirements for ECE majors. It is offered in both the Fall and Spring semesters.

## Content Covered

This course is a good technical elective. It is interesting and not an overwhelming workload. The course is mostly conceptual. There is some math, but it is not a primary part of the course. Throughout the class, you learn the history of electronic music. You learn about how the ear hears, and how you can create sounds and music using sine waves as building blocks. One thing you will not learn is how to make EDM type music.

## Prerequisites

- [ECE310](ECE310.md)

The official prerequisite for this class is [ECE310](ECE310.md). What you need for this class is the ability to read sheet music and a basic understanding of tempo, pitch, etc. You should take [ECE120](ECE120.md) first. And you need to be reasonably familiar with DSP basics to understand lectures, which means you will either need ECE310 or read up digital filters, transforms, and sampling related topics on your own.

## When to Take it 

The course is offered every semester. It is a good tech elective to take if you are interested in audio processing/engineering and enjoyed the content/applications of [ECE310](ECE310.md).

## Course Structure

Homework consists of reading one article a week, two to ten pages, and writing a page of answers to qualitative questions, which all in all, takes about three hours, once a week. You also spend two hours per week in the lab with a partner, working with music synthesis software. The lab won't show up on your schedule; you sign up for a time during the first week of class. There are no lab write-ups, and no time required beyond the two hours spent in lab. Labs are fun, informative, and not tough. You spend the last four weeks of class on an open ended final project. Again, it's neat, but not overwhelming.

## Instructors

The course is taught exclusively by Professor Zuofu Cheng, the [ECE385](ECE385.md) Professor. 

[comment]: # (##CourseTips)

## Life After

Students who enjoy ECE402 may enjoy [ECE418](ECE418.md), Image and Video Processing. The job market for computer music engineers is primarily in the film/gaming industry, and is not overwhelmingly expansive, so for those who have an interest in working for the engineering side of the film industry, this course may be a good supplement/introduction to the industry. In the past, students have been introduced to internships with Lucasfilm.