---
tags:
- Radio frequency
---

# ECE454

ECE454 (Antennas) is a 3-credit-hour course that satisfies the Technical Elective requirements for ECE majors. It is offered only every two years in the spring semester of every even-numbered year (e.g, Spring 2022, Spring 2024)

## Content covered

After a review of Maxwell's equations, the Hertzian dipole is introduced as the most simple radiating element. The far field field patters are discussed, and duality is applied to analyze the small loop antenna. Then, antenna parameters in both the radiating aspect as well as the circuit aspect are covered. These include concepts like gain, directivity, various measures of efficiency, and different measures of beam width on the circuit side. Ideas on the circuit model side consist of radiation resistance and mutual coupling. The rest of the course uses these basics to analyze and categorize other popular radiating systems. These include dipoles, folded dipoles, monopoles, loop antennas, microstrip antennas, slot antennas, horn antennas, and broadband antennas. In depth study of antenna arrays is also covered, similar to the section in [350](ECE350.md) about antenna arrays, but with more attention to side lobes and grating lobes. The course emphasizes imperfect systems in addition to the ideal field patters, and considers imperfect ground planes and lossy materials in the models. There is also a design project at the end of the semester. The instructor will offer a scenario that deals with not just the antenna design, but the design of the entire communications systems. A comprehensive study on everything from design philosophy to technical and budget concerns is part of the report.

## Prerequisites

- [ECE350](ECE350.md)

[ECE350](ECE350.md) is the only prerequisite. [350](ECE350.md) introduces concepts like vector potential and the Hertzian dipole that are important tools in conceptualizing antenna
theory. Familiarity with calculus in spherical and cylindrical coordinates is a must.

## When to Take It

If this class sounds interesting, take it soon after you take [350](ECE350.md). There is a short review of Maxwell's Equations at the beginning of the course, so it is not necessarily vital to take it immediately after taking [350](ECE350.md). It is usually only offered in the spring.

## Course Structure

The class consists of around 6 homework sets, each on about 2 weeks of material. The amount of homework is enough to prevent students from doing it the night before, but is pretty reasonable if time is managed properly. Homework answers are not released, so going to office hours to learn from homework mistakes is encouraged. There is one midterm half way through the course, and the midterm is open notes and open homework. There is also a design project that results in a report of around 20 pages. Students can expect to spend 5-10 hours a week outside of class on homework and the design project.

## Instructors

Professor Jennifer Bernhard taught this course in Spring 2022. Professor Stephen Bass taught this course in Spring 2024.

[comment]: # (## Course Tips)

## Life After

This class is a step towards working in antenna design at RIM or T-Mobile, for example. A student interested in this area might consider taking other classes in the 450 series of the ECE curriculum, like [451](ECE451.md) (Advanced Microwave Measurements), [453](ECE453.md) (Wireless Communication Systems), [457](ECE457.md) (Microwave Devices & Circuits). Other complimentary courses might include [459](ECE459.md) (Communication Systems) and [ECE310](ECE310.md) (Digital Signals Processing) to improve the understanding of wireless communications systems from the signals perspective. Really any course related to wireless communication or remote sensing is helpful in gaining a full understanding of modern communications. Ambitious students can consider taking the graduate EM course, ECE520 if they wish to further grow their understanding of EM waves and radiating systems. There is also a graduate level antennas course offered once every 2 years, ECE577.

[comment]: # (## Infamous Topics)