---
tags:
- Radio frequency
- Semiconductors
- Circuits
---

# ECE457

ECE457 (Microwave Devices and Circuits) is a 3-credit-hour course that satisfies the Technical Elective requirements for ECE majors. It has traditionally been offered in Fall semesters, but was offered most recently in Spring 2024.

## Content Covered

The course starts with an overview of transmission line theory. Formulas for line impedances and reflection coefficients are reviewed, as well as a review of the Smith Chart. The class then covers 2 port parameters (Z, Y, ABCD and S) and analyzes various lumped component and transmission line circuits using 2 port parameters. Students will learn to design a variety of filter circuits using both lumped components and transmission lines using all of the previous concepts. Next power divider, combiner, and coupler design is covered. Again, a wide variety of coupler types are analyzed. The last topic is the use and applications of PIN diodes as mixers and switches. A few lectures also go over noise in microwave circuits. 

## Prerequisites

- [ECE340](ECE340.md)
- [ECE350](ECE350.md)

The only truly necessary prerequisite is [ECE350](ECE350.md), but students can take this with just [ECE329](ECE329.md) if they absolutely must fit it in their schedule. Coming in with an understanding of transmission line theory will make this class more manageable.

## When to Take It

Students who want to know more about transmission line theory and are interested in high frequency circuit design should take this class. It was recently offered in Spring 2024, so look out to see if these course is offered in further spring semesters.

## Course Structure

The course is run entirely online. There is a homework assignment due every couple of weeks. All of the problems and due dates are posted at the very beginning of the semester, so there are no surprises. Most of the homework problems are from the textbook, but some problems are written by the professor. There is one midterm and one final exam. Both are open-note, open-homework. Students are basically allowed to bring any notes with them, except for the textbook itself. Answers to the homework or exams are not released, so students must go to office hours if they need help correcting mistakes. There is also a 2-part design project. The first part involves designing some kind of microwave circuit; the second part involves analyzing a real set of data. Both steps make heavy use of the simulation program, PUFF, that is introduced during the course.

## Instructors

For Fall 2020, Fall 2021, and Fall 2022, the course was taught by Professor Xu Chen, but in Spring 2024, the course was taught by Professor Songbin Gong.

[comment]: # (## Course Tips)

## Life After

Anyone going into high frequency circuit design will benefit greatly from taking this class. Note that this class only covers passive circuits, with the exception of diodes. While this class is grounded in electromagnetic theory and related to the rest of the 450 series of ECE classes, students interested in circuit design should also consider the integrated circuit courses: [ECE482](ECE482.md) (Digital IC Design) and [ECE483](ECE483.md) (Analog IC Design).

[comment]: # (## Infamous Topics)
