---
tags:
- Power
- Power electronics
- Circuits
- Analog circuits
---
# ECE464

ECE464 (Power Electronics) is a 3-credit-hour senior level course that satisfies the Technical Electives requirement for ECE majors. It is offered only in the fall.

## Content Covered

- AC-DC conversion
- DC-DC conversion
- Magnetics
- Isolated DC-DC conversion
- DC-AC conversion
- Real components

ECE464 is a senior level course in power electronics, the use of electronics for the conversion and control of electric power.  The course begins with AC-DC conversion.  In this section, half-wave rectifiers and full-wave rectifiers are introduced, along with the design of output filters to reduce ripple.  To describe and compare the circuits discussed in this section, the concepts of ripple factor, displacement and distortion factor, and total harmonic distortion are introduced.  

The course then moves to DC-DC conversion, which is covered for most of ECE464.  Importantly, students should develop the ability to analyze switching DC-DC converters during this section.  The problems with simple voltage divider and linear regulator circuits are discussed, to motivate the use of switching DC-DC converters.  Direct DC-DC converters (buck and boost converters) are first covered, along with the implementation of real switches.  Various indirect DC-DC converters, including buck boost, Ćuk, and SEPIC converters, are then introduced.  The operation of DC-DC converters in discontinuous conduction mode is examined.  

The course then covers magnetics.  Maxwell’s equations are used to derive the concept of magnetic circuits, which are used for the modeling and design of inductors and transformers.  The equivalent circuit of a transformer, with magnetizing and leakage inductance, is derived.  The use of transformers to produce isolated DC-DC converters, including flyback and forward converters, is then discussed.  To accommodate the effects of leakage inductance, the analysis and design of clamp circuits is covered.

Finally, the course moves to DC-AC converters, or inverters.  In this section, inverters that switch at the output frequency are discussed, including voltage-sourced inverters and multilevel inverters, along with their switching configurations.  The use of pulse width modulation (PWM) with inverters is then analyzed, along with the applications of PWM inverters to power systems.  The course circles back to AC-DC conversion, covering active rectifiers, before concluding with the analysis of power electronic circuits with real components - capacitors with equivalent series resistances, MOSFETs with on-resistances, thermal considerations, etc.

## Prerequisites

- [ECE342](ECE342.md)

The only official prerequisite is [ECE342](ECE342.md), though very little content from ECE342 carries over to ECE464.  [ECE210](ECE210.md) is the most important prerequisite, as phasors and Fourier series are used in this course.  Some concepts from [ECE330](ECE330.md), such as complex power, magnetic circuits, and transformers, are also covered in ECE464.  So, while not necessary, it may be helpful to take ECE330 beforehand.

## When to Take it

Take this course if you have an interest in power or circuits.  It is recommended to take ECE464 with [ECE469 - Power Electronics Laboratory](ECE469.md), the complementary lab for the course, as it helps with understanding concepts learned in this class and with developing design experience for real-world power electronic circuits.

## Course Structure

ECE464 has an average workload.  Homework is assigned weekly, except during exam weeks.  Homeworks are relatively short and typically take between 4-8 hours to complete.  Homeworks consist of a mixture of analysis, design, and occasionally, simulation problems using LTspice.  

In addition to the homeworks, the course has two midterm exams and one final exam.  The midterm exams are not very difficult and are untimed.  However, they can be quite long, potentially taking several hours to complete. Fortunately, ice cream is provided.  The final is a bit more difficult and is timed.  Students are allowed one cheat sheet for the first midterm, two cheat sheets for the second midterm, and three cheat sheets for the final exam.  

## Instructors

Profs. Banerjee and Stillwell generally alternate in teaching this course.

## Course Tips

Office hours are very helpful for completing the homework, as the TA works through each homework problem during office hours.  However, so that you understand the content, it is best to attempt each homework problem before going to office hours for help.  

For the exams, going through the provided past exam is the most helpful way of studying. 

## Life After

Students who wish to pursue power electronics further should take [ECE486 - Control Systems](ECE486.md).  ECE464 and ECE486 are prerequisites to a new special topics course introduced by Professor Banerjee, [ECE498AB - Power Electronics Control](ECE498AB.md). 

Students should also look to other courses in the power field, such as [ECE333 - Green Electric Energy](ECE333.md), [ECE431 - Electric Machinery](ECE431.md), and [ECE476 - Power System Analysis](ECE476.md), and in the circuits field, such as [ECE483 - Analog IC Design and ECE482 - Digital IC Design](ECE482.md).  

Other useful classes include [ECE437 - Sensors and Instrumentation](ECE437.md) and [ECE490 - Introduction to Optimization](ECE490.md).

## Infamous Topics

None!

## Resources

