# ECE499

ECE496 (Senior Thesis) is a 2-credit hour course that satisfies the Advanced Composition requirement for ECE majors, but only if preceded by exactly [ECE496](ECE496.md) in the previous semester. EEs need to have a project with some sort of hardware in it, otherwise they are required to implement a special circuit. ECE499 is offered in the fall, spring, and summer, and is administered on a professor-by-professor basis.

## How It Works

By this point, students should have been working with their professor for an entire semester. ECE499 allows you to now show off all the hard work that you've done. About a month before the end of the semester, students are required to submit a draft of their completed senior thesis to ECE Editorial Services. ECE Editorial Services will look over your thesis and return it to you. You must then make the necessary edits before officially depositing your thesis on the last day of the semester. During the last month, students will also give a 10-minute presentation on their work to [ECE200](ECE200.md) students as part of the Undergraduate Research Symposium, directed by Professor Kudeki.

## Prerequisites

- [ECE496](ECE496.md)
- Consent of instructor who you will be doing research with.

## When to Take it

Take this course after taking [ECE496](ECE496.md).

## Course Tips

Start your senior thesis really, really, really early. No matter how long you think it's gonna take, it'll probably take longer. Senior theses take for longer to write since, unlike lab reports of previous courses in your ECE career, someone will actually be going through and reading and trying to understand what you did.

The presentation should be entertaining. If you did any work related to electromagnetics, make sure you are able to answer questions about your thesis; Professor Kudeki loves asking questions to students who present.
