# Declaring a Minor

## What is a Minor?
A minor represents a supplementary field of study beyond your designated major. It is not an additional degree conferred at graduation but an extra qualification appended to your degree upon completion. Declaring a minor is not required for graduation, however, students who have a particular interest in a field or feel that a minor would be beneficial to their degree typically declare a minor. 

## Should I Declare an Undergraduate Minor? 
Taking on an additional program of study like a minor can be a lot of extra work, minors range from 15 to 21 (maximum) credit hours of additional work on top of your major. Classes for a minor may or may not count towards classes for your major, be it core courses or free electives, so keep this in mind when making your decision. Make sure that your minor is also in a field that you enjoy, students declare minors for a vareity of reasons but the main reason people drop or cancel their minor is because they do not enjoy the field.

## Taking Classes for my Undergraduate Minor
Taking classes for your minor can be complicated at times, especially because most departments do not offer priority registration for students pursuing a minor. While courses are typically limited to majors and minors of the host department, their registration timelines differ. Departments will (almost) always prioritize students who are pursuing a major in their department, so taking popular classes in the department can prove to be difficult. The best advice one can give for registering the classes you want while pursuing minor is to make a plan. Familiarize yourself with class registration dates and set notifications using the course explorer.

## Graduating with (or without) an Undergraduate Minor
As long as you fufill the requirements for your minor it will automatically be added to your degree. This is true for all undergraduate minors across campus. Not completing your minor does not incur penalties at graduation; it simply won't be acknowledged on your degree. Keep in mind that minors cannot be retroactively added to your degree.


## Popular Minors
While campus offers various minors, here is a list of some of the most popular among the ECE department. A comprehensive list of minors on campus can be found [here](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/minors/).

- [Mathematics](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/las/minors/mathematics/)
- [Statistics](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/las/minors/statistics/)
- [Business Minor for Non-Business Majors](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/bus/minors/business-non-business/)
- [Computer Science](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/engineering/minors/computer-science/) [^1]
- [Physics](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/engineering/minors/physics/)
- [Technology and Management](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/eng_bus/minors/technology-management/) [^2]
- [Music](http://catalog.illinois.edu/undergraduate/faa/minors/music/)



[^1]: Computer Engineering and Computer Science majors can not declare the Computer Science minor

[^2]: This is a selective program that must be applied to in the winter of the students' second year