# Getting into Grad School


This [edition](6.Is%20grad%20school%20for%20you.md) of DEN features the article "Is grad school for me?" Once you realize that graduate school is indeed the appropriate decision for you, the next natural step is to put together a very strong application. This article provides an overview of how you can cruise through the entire application process. We will cite instances from past alumni's experiences along the way, and for that reason, some of my suggestions are bound to be biased. Keep in mind, that's the point: to share certain facts of life held secret by admissions websites and guidance counselors. 

It is impossible to embark on this daunting journey without making a timeline of requirements to be fulfilled. Schools vary in their criteria for selection, but the list generally includes some mix of standardized tests, transcripts, letters of reference, personal statements, research and work experiences, honors and awards, leadership positions, and extracurricular activities. As an applicant, you need to form much more elaborate guidelines of your own, tailored to your strengths and weaknesses. First and foremost, make a list of schools you want to apply to and fellowships you are eligible for. Spend some time and recall every single moment of your life since high school; freshmen, sophomores, and even juniors---start a diary. Spending half an hour periodically will make recollecting your past experiences much easier when applying.

## Which schools are right for me?
Arguably, the hardest part of the entire process is picking schools. It requires you to analyze yourself the way the admissions committee would; after all, this is a game that you very desperately want to win. The consoling part is that you know the winning strategy. You are applying for a job where the only qualification is your likelihood of success in contributing to the scientific community, whether it is the academic realm with journal papers or the industry with inventions and patents.
 
Akin to undergraduate applications, you should apply to a wide variety of schools – one or two backups, a few where your chances of admissions are around 50%, and one or two that you think are nearly impossible to get into.
 
If you worked on independent projects and have research experience, top ranked programs such as MIT, Stanford, Berkeley, and U of I are within reach. Knowing this, you should start looking for research opportunities very early as an undergraduate---the earlier the better. Some of our peers started freshman year and had around three publications by the time they were seniors. Of course, not everyone is going to have such an impressive resume. You could also network with professors at conferences and other events. There are multiple avenues to reach your dream school. 

Know, however, that this process is not about getting into the highest ranked school. You should evaluate your likelihood of success at various institutions and form a ranking list of your own. Key factors to consider: funding, faculty, labs (both within the institution and those affiliated with it), and geographical location (for example, Stanford is located at the heart of Silicon Valley). It therefore makes more sense to choose a specific group at Kansas rather than to cluelessly enter MIT. Of course, prestige never hurts and with all things being equal, selecting a higher ranked school is rational as it usually correlates with better opportunities.

## Standardized Tests
An alum here once said that GREs can only hurt you – he was partially right. It depends on the specific schools you are considering. MIT does not even accept the GRE. This is generally true for some of the other top programs – you can literally fail the GRE and still get into these schools. That's because they scan for something entirely different. Some less popular schools require that you score at least a 600 on each section and they simply reject everyone below the threshold. 

It is obviously very helpful to have a rough idea of your list of schools. It never hurts to do well, but sometimes, you can be constrained by time and other resources. If you are only applying to MIT, Stanford, and U of I, you can afford to spend a day or two studying; just make sure you don't mess up the math section. You would need to spend months if you are applying to some of the less popular backup schools.

## Letters of Reference
As with GREs, letters of reference are valued differently by different institutions; the underlying principle, however, is the same. A hiring manager will always rely on the words of his peers rather than a piece of paper. Likewise, professors value their peers' opinions more than anything else. The best situation is to have three professors, all of them experts in their respective fields, identify you as one of the best students they have ever had.

Try to work with multiple professors so that they can all say something meaningful about your research potential. When you plan your courses, take a project oriented class such as [ECE420](../Course%20Wiki/ECE%20Course%20Offerings/ECE420.md); through perseverance and hard work, impress your instructor with a mesmerizing final project. In classes that are less conducive to such interactions, make frequent visits to office hours. Once, a student was out of campus for a semester---he made it a point to keep in touch with his professors via email. Know that professors are really busy people and it is your duty to constantly remind them of your existence. There are many ways, and a particularly effective approach is to contact students within the group.

## Research Statement

In roughly two pages, you are expected to summarize your entire life; well, at least your undergraduate career. This process can be less intimidating by following one simple and effective rule. Start early. You are only going to be busier in the future. Admissions committee members spend less than five minutes reading each essay---what will make you stand out? 

First and foremost is flawlessness. Read and reread your essay until there are absolutely no spelling and grammatical errors---it shows that you didn't just write something overnight and spent the time necessary. More importantly, remember once again that this is a job application. Craft a story about yourself which will get you as many positions as possible. 

Strike a balance between depth and breadth; if you are very specific about what you want to do and there aren't any professors interested in that specific area, you won't get accepted. If you are too broad and claim to be the jack of all trades, no one will want you; if you claim to be the master of all trades, no one will believe you. In general, you should only mention something if you have solid evidence. For example, saying you were once obsessed with chess is meaningless; instead, say that you were a FIDE master and used chess strategies to derive efficient algorithms (if that's true). 

Most of us were bored and annoyed whenever our middle school teachers told us "show, don't tell." Our members who are involved in research can say that they regret not having paid close attention to their words then, for that is exactly what you should do on your grad school app. Write a story around each of your achievements so that they complement your transcripts, references, and resume.

## Tips to Boost your Application
There are certain things you can do to enhance your application. Remember that you need MIT or Stanford or UIUC much more than they need you--- whoever you are, there are probably a hundred others just as good or better. The entire game is to maximize the attention given to you. Do whatever it takes, without breaking any laws or offending others.

Contact professors whose interests match your own and ask them about the possibility of working with them. This is analogous to the interview process while applying for a job; some won't respond, some will reply with a blatant no, some will initially appear promising, only to later reject you; but be persistent until you hear from that one professor who feels you would fit perfectly well in his/her group. Your method of contact will also depend on what is geographically feasible; if the professor is nearby, try to meet him or her in person; otherwise, email is acceptable. Be careful to add substance to your email and avoid spamming.

Constantly call the admissions staff about your application. Most importantly, don't hesitate to update each school about your achievements after submitting the application. For example, if you end up winning a fellowship or some national award, it is strictly to your advantage to call in and inform them.

## Fellowships

If you are a US citizen or permanent resident, there are quite literally hundreds of fellowships you will be eligible for. Pick a few and apply. Government based fellowships such as NSF and NDSEG will support you for three years. In any case, the only thing that should stop an eligible candidate from applying is laziness---and as we all know, graduate school is certainly not the appropriate route for such folks.

## References

Most of what we have shared with you is not new, but it helps to be reminded of the existing information. This article was created with the intention of making sure it is not too lengthy or boring. When I went through this process, I used several resources, mainly blogs maintained by graduate students and professors. Each provides advice from a slightly different viewpoint.

- David Evans's [Advice](https://uvasrg.github.io/prospective/)
- Terrence Tao's [Blog](http://terrytao.wordpress.com/career-advice/)
- Jean Yang's [Blog](http://jxyzabc.blogspot.com/)