# Finding a full-time job


Today's economy has made getting the jobs you want harder than ever. At a top school like Illinois, there will always be jobs for our students, but when that company you've always dreamt of working for has a hiring freeze, is there very much you can do?

There are definitely a lot of students affected by the job market crunch, and then there are some for whom the job hunt has been pretty much the same as it would be any other year. These students aren't always the ones with the highest grades or the densest resumes. But, they know how to find a job. Here are a few of the techniques we've seen used successfully:

## Be specific.
When the one employer who is still hiring is flooded with applicants, he's not likely to want to spend time and effort trying to find a good place for you. You need to know specifically which positions you are interested in, and why. When you can explain this to an employer, it shows that you've done your research, you have high interest in the company, and you've saved him some time. Being specific may extend to such items as the objective line on your resume and applying to specific positions online. If there is something specific you are looking for, being clear about it with employers can only help.

## Make one friend.
If you can really impress a single person at the company, it helps a lot more than if multiple people think you're good. The fact is that there are a lot of opportunities for your application to fall through the cracks. If you've made one friend, a well-wisher that wants you to get that job, he or she will make sure you get at least as good a shot at the job as anyone else.

## Be persistent.
If an employer didn't respond to an email, don't hesitate to write again, or call. As long as you are nice to the employer in every communication you have, all you're doing is showing interest. At the same time, you're making sure you are not forgotten. On the flip side of this, be sure to respond to any contact made by an employer as soon as you can. One of our members recalls his boss saying he would email some people just to see whether they were on top of things and would respond within a day.

## Have a backup plan.
One last trick up your sleeve. Always maintain a back up plan, whether it be maintaining relations with various recruiters, or keeping the option of research on campus open. It is better to do something than nothing. In today's economy of rescinded offers and crumbling companies, you're far better off safe than sorry.

These techniques should help you in your search for a job, but also be sure to get your resume critiqued and do a mock interview with Engineering Career Services. The resume critique will not only help you make your resume more clear and remove any glaring mistakes, but ECS will also tell you about keywords and how employers use these to find your resume online. ECS will also give you a list of ways to prepare for the job hunt. Also, be sure to talk to peers about your job search. You can often find someone you know who has interviewed with the company you are looking at, if not better. Good luck with your job hunt!

[comment]: # (This is taken from the page Job Search Advice and is generic ... would be great if we have advice more relevant to full-time jobs rather than both job/internship.)