# CS124

CS124 (Intro to Computer Science I) is a 3-credit hour course that is not required for CE or EE majors, but is required for the ECE minor or both CS and CS+X majors. The course can be taught in Java or Kotlin.

## Content Covered

The content covered in CS124 will introduce the following topics:

### Topics

- Variables and Types
- Arrays and Loops
- Functions and Algorithms
- Strings
- Maps, Sets and Collections
- Libraries
- Objects
- Classes and Constructors
- Polymorphism and Inheritance
- Exceptions
- Interfaces
- Linked Lists, Trees and Recursion
- Sorting Algorithms

## Prerequisites

CS124's prerequisites are either completion of 3 years of high-school math, or [MATH 112](../MATH%20Course%20Offerings/MATH112.md). The prerequisites for this course are intentionally easy, lowering the barrier of entry to the course for students within any college at UIUC.

## When to Take it

For ECE majors, there is no requirement to take the course. However, for ECE minors or CS majors, this course has a ton of later postrequisites, like [CS128](./CS128.md) and [CS225](./CS225.md). Because of this, it is reccomended that students take this course as soon as possible, most likely in their freshman fall or spring semester.

## Course Structure

### Lectures

CS124 is strictly online: there are no in-person lectures. Instead, students engage with interactive daily lessons, which consist of runnable code examples, walkthroughs, and short videos. 

### Homework

Homework is assigned daily alongside each lesson, covering the material explained in the lesson through a small programming problem or debugging challenge. You are provided with a total of 9 drops across the semester.

### Quizzes

CS124 has 15 total weekly quizzes, scheduled on PrarieTest at CBTF (Computer-Based Testing Facility) locations. Previously, the quizzes were held online through the finicky CS124 course website. Quizzes generally cover content that was taught over that week, and consist of a mix of multiple choice questions, debugging challenges, and programming problems. The quiz grades are not curved at all, and there are a total of 3 drops.

### MPs

Later on in the course, a final machine project is introduced, consisting of approximately 3 checkpoints that teach students about the git workflow, as well as Android Studio. There are no drops, so make sure to complete each checkpoint on time.

## Instructors

Professor Geoffrey Challen is the sole instructor of this course. However, there is a large number of course assistants and associates who directly help students. Course information is disseminated through emails, the course website, as well as the [course forum](https://forum.cs124.org/). 

## Course Tips

Intro to Computer Science I is exactly that: an introduction. However, that doesn't stop the course from ramping up near the end of the semester, with MPs and quizzes happening concurrently. Students who are not necessarily prepared can easily fall behind, and may end up losing a significant amount of points. Take advantage of tutoring office hours, since that's the only way you can get direct help on homework and MPs. Specifically, start MPs early, which will allow you to find problems fast, and not wait in the queue for tutoring for up to multiple hours.

Students who are coming into UIUC with a 5 on the AP Computer Science A and have further programming experience may want to consider taking the proficiency exam, allowing you to earn course credit without taking the course.

## Life After

CS124 directly leads into [CS128](./CS128.md), which expands further onto computing and computational programs, focusing on the C++ language. It also is a prerequisite for [CS173](./CS173.md), utilizing programming experience and while introducting math and logic. However, if you're not interested, CS124 stands by itself as a strong fundamental course for programming for any major.

## Infamous Topics

- Maps and Sets
- Polymorphism
- Classes

## Resources

- [Course Website](https://www.cs124.org/)
