# CS173

CS173 (Discrete Structures) is a 3-credit hour course that is specifically required for CS majors and CEs and qualifies as a technical elective for EEs. It is offered in both the fall and spring. [MATH213](../MATH%20Course%20Offerings/MATH213.md) may substitute this course for ECE majors, and cannot for CS majors.

## Content Covered

The topics covered in CS 173 will introduce number theory concepts, mathematical proofs, especially inductive proofs, set theory, graph theory, recursive relations, trees, counting, common algorithms, and big O analysis. 

### Topics
- Math Concepts and Basic Boolean Logic
- Proofs and Number Theory
- Modular Arithmatic and Sets
- Relations
- Functions
- Graphs and 2-way Bounding
- Induction
- Recursive Definition
- Trees and Grammars
- Big-O and Algorithms
- NP Time
- Collections of Sets
- Contradiction State Diagrams
- State Diagrams Countability

## Prerequisites

- [CS124](./CS124.md) OR [ECE220](../ECE%20Course%20Offerings/ECE220.md)
- MATH220 OR [MATH221](../MATH%20Course%20Offerings/MATH221.md)

CS 173's few prerequisites are of limited importance to being able to succeed in the course. Coding experience is mainly helpful for analyzing Big-O for several algorithms but also helps in the specific mindset it promotes. Having the prerequisites done is still recommended, especially since the requirement for ECE students to take ECE 220 before this course has been enforced recently.

## When to Take it

Due to this class being a hard prerequisite for [CS 225](./CS225.md), we now recommend taking MATH 213 concurrently with ECE 220 instead.

Discrete Structures officially a prerequisite for CS 225, which is the gateway to most, if not all CS courses.  As such, take Discrete Structures as early as possible, especially for Computer Engineering majors.  Most higher-level CS courses will definitely cover discrete math concepts so the topics introduced in CS 173 will be reviewed again and again.  Furthermore, a lot of the computer engineering concepts are also introduced in this class and so it will complement a lot of early computer engineering classes, like ECE 120 and ECE 220.  Though it is possible to do well even when taking discrete structures concurrently with a coding class, like ECE 220 or CS 125, it is highly recommended to take the coding class before taking CS 173.  Exposure to coding will greatly help the understanding of discrete math and taking them concurrently will most likely just be a bigger burden to try and grasp the concepts faster. 

## Course Structure

### Lecture

CS173 has 2-5 asynchronous lecture videos per week which are posted on the course website.  Aside from this, lecture notes and sections to read are also posted, which go over the topics covered in the videos.

### Tutorial and Homework

CS173 has tutorial sections similar to discussion sections of other classes.  They are held in a lecture hall and nothing is required to be turned in during class.

Each week will have one Pre-Tutorial Checkpoint due the day before tutorial, and one Homework due 4 days after tutorial. These are autograded on PrairieLearn, and you can submit them as many times as needed to get full credit.

The Pre-Tutorial Checkpoints are simpler questions designed to make sure that you have completed the readings and watched the lecture videos, and the Homeworks released after tutorial go into more depth.

### Exams and Grading

CS173 has 6 smaller Examlets and a final, and typically does not curve exam scores. Exam scores make up roughly 90% of a student's grade and the remainder comes from pretutorial checkpoints and homework.

They'll drop your lowest checkpoint grade and your lowest homework grade when computing your final averages (though remember you can submit these multiple times, so it should not be too difficult to ultimately get 100% on all of them).

At the end of the semester (most likely the last week of the semester), you can optionally choose to retake one of the examlets. (You do not have to declare in advance which you're retaking - the choices will be offered to you when you've started the retake at the CBTF.) Your retake score will replace your original score if it is better.


## Instructors

Professor Margaret Fleck and Professor Viraj Kumar usually teach CS 173; however, there may be some different professors in different semesters. The professors historically are great at carefully explaining confusing material during their office hours and to a limited degree lecture. They typically take extra care to ensure that all questions are answered and the material is learned.

## Course Tips

Discrete Structures is a very straightforward class but it is very easy to fall behind at the end of the semester. The autograded HW's are can get hard, so it's good to check answers with other students. The short answer homeworks are graded on completion and you are provided with the solution. The examlets usually consists of one large proof-like problem and other smaller problems. These pretty straightforward, and as long as you pay attention in class and do the HW you should be mostly fine. Be careful, however: the examlets sometimes simply ask you to write down definitions, so make sure to learn definitions as well. It can be very helpful to do the previous exams as they can offer a lot of insight into patterns, grading, and how to approach problems.

Some parts, like trees and relations, may seem really straightforward but students should always just try and keep up with the class since there are some concepts that are very, very difficult, like graph theory, sets of sets, functions, and counting.  There is also a textbook available for the class (which I highly recommend reading), and it is very helpful in explaining the concepts but is not specifically required to do well in the course.  I found the discussion section extremely helpful in clearing up confusing concepts and doing practice problems. Overall, Discrete Structures covers a lot of material but is given at a very good pace with a lot of support from the staff.  Students should just try and keep up with the material and everything should be fine.

## Life After

CS 173 is the gateway to all higher-level CS and ECE tech-electives. The content seen in CS 173 will be reviewed again and again for most ECE/CS tech-electives. CS 225 (Data Structures) can be taken afterward, if not taken concurrently.  For students who enjoy CS theory, consider [CS 374A](./CS374A.md) (Introduction to Algs & Models of Comp) and [CS 473](./CS473.md) (Fundamental Algorithms), which both build on the fundamentals introduced in CS 173.

## Infamous Topics

- Induction Proofs
- Big-O Analysis
- Set and Graph Theory

## Resources

- [Professor Fleck's Textbook](https://mfleck.cs.illinois.edu/building-blocks/index-sp2020.html)
- [Fall 2023 Course Website](https://courses.grainger.illinois.edu/cs173/fa2023/ALL-lectures/)