---
tags:
- Systems
- Software engineering
- Robotics
---

# CS424

CS424 (Real-Time Systems) is a 3/4-credit-hour course that satisfies the Technical Electives requirement for ECE majors and satisfies an Advanced Computing Elective for CEs. It is only in fall semesters.

## Content Covered

- Threads and Tasks
- Priorities
- Resource Partitioning
- Complexity Reduction and Reliability
- Real-Time Scheduling
- Power-Conscious algorithms
- Real-Time AI

This course offers a more conceptual approach to the same general topics covered in [CS431](CS431.md). Along with briefly revisiting things like feedback control and periodic scheduling, you'll study the difference between availability and reliability, dependency analysis, and other design principles for an embedded system reacting to real-time data from the surrounding world. Much time will be spent on the Simplex architecture principles, by which a complex but less-reliable program can be checked by a simple, more-reliable program. For instance, a complex routing program designed to find the ideal solution that sometimes fails can be checked by seeing that its path is less than that produced by a simple naive approach. There are also a lot of references to realtime OS topics and current embedded research in UIUC. 

The course is a bit dry if one is not aware of embedded topics or has no interest, but helps a lot should one go down this field.

The labs require the programming of a roomba with a reliable and synchronized approach. It's done in groups of 4 and a good learning experience in embedded design and robotics. There is also exposure to sensor reading and OpenCV in these lab sections. 

The professor may also begin the course by surveying students to gauge interest in topics, and add relevant topics to the course if enough interest is displayed.

## Prerequisites

- [ECE391](../ECE%20Course%20Offerings/ECE391.md) or [CS341](CS341.md)

You do need a fair amount of coding experience since you're expected to do the labs (groups of 4). Similar to [CS431](CS431.md), you also need a basic understanding of how processors work. Introductory level probability helps significantly in the reliability section of the course, but is still taught explicitly so there is no worry should you decide to take this before [313](../ECE%20Course%20Offerings/ECE313.md). The labs are in C++ but may use the pyserial interface. This requires bare minimum exposure to Python. There is significant interfacing with Raspberry Pi and other hardware however. There are several concepts in scheduling that are introduced, especially real-time scheduling, as well as several embedded system examples; [ECE391](../ECE%20Course%20Offerings/ECE391.md)/[CS341](CS341.md) is a good prerequisite, mostly for exposure to these topics such as scheduling or synchronization and locking, but not absolutely necessary if one is aware of the field. Multithreaded thread programming is required, however, so it may be a good idea to take the above if not willing to self-learn.

## When to Take It

You'll find a sizable number of graduate students in the course; the rest will be seniors. There may be some juniors in the course, but it has a much more lighter approach than most technical courses so there's no need to rush it.

## Course Structure

The class has two midterms (each worth 15%) and a cumulative final (worth 20%), as well as about four homeworks (together worth 20%) and five labs (together worth 20%). The last 10% of the grade is for participation. Just like in [431](CS431.md), the homeworks can be completed in a few hours each, if that.

The labs (an extremely significant part of the grade!) build on one another to work up to programming the Roomba robot to move about the room following Android phone instructions while staying within safety limits (e.g. not bumping into things) per Simplex requirements. (After completing this, you can do an optional extension for a fourth credit hour.) You can probably do this in two or three hours per week, if you understand the concepts and can program well. The lab meets weekly, but you're only required to show up to demo the projects about every other week.

## Instructors

The course is taught by Professor Tarek Abdelzaher. He has done research in reliability and IoT.

[comment]: # (## Course Tips)

## Life After

Parts of this class are approaching the cutting-edge of research; you might be able to arrange a research project to follow up on topics learned. Also, this helps prepare you for various jobs in embedded systems. There is also a 4-credit hour project that one can turn into a research project if invested enough. Reliability and fault-tolerance are also soft skills that are useful to have in industry and may give one an extra edge over others in the job hunt. Other similar/relevant courses to take include [ECE486](../ECE%20Course%20Offerings/ECE486.md) (Control Systems), [CS431](CS431.md) (Embedded Systems), and [ECE434](../ECE%20Course%20Offerings/ECE434.md) (Real-World Algorithms for IoT and Data Science).

## Infamous Topics